Add Computed Fields #4 (#577)
nautobot/nautobot: nautobot/docs/additional-features/computed-fields.md

# Computed Fields

Computed fields are largely based on custom fields. See the overview of [Custom Fields](./custom-fields.md). As the name suggests, computed fields serve the need for a custom field where the value is generated using data that Nautobot stores in it's database.

As an example, for use by some automation system, you might want to be able to have an automatically generated field on the Device model that combines the name of the device and the uppercased site name. To do that, you would define a Jinja template for this field that looks like such:

> ```jinja2

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```jinja2
```

{{ obj.name }}_{{ obj.site.name | upper }}
```

!!! note

>     Everytime an object with this computed field is loaded, the template gets rendered. It's important to note that these values are not stored in the database and are dynamically rendered.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Every time an object with this computed field is loaded, the template gets re-rendered with the currently available data. It's important to note that these rendered values are not stored in the database; only the template is.
```

## Creating Computed Fields

Computed fields can be created through the Nautobot UI under Extensibility > Computed Fields.

Each computed field must have a slug and a label.
- Slug must be a simple, database-friendly string, e.g. `device_with_site`
- Label is used as the human-friendly display name for this field in the UI, for example, `Device With Site`.

Similar to custom fields, the weight value is used to order computed fields within a form. A description can also be provided, and will appear beneath the field in a form.

Computed fields must define a template from which to render their values. The template field must contain a valid Jinja2 template string.

> A computed field must be assigned to an object types, or model, in Nautobot. Once created, computed fields will automatically appear as part of these models in the web UI. See notes about viewing computed fields via the REST API below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A computed field must be assigned to an object type, or model, in Nautobot. Once created, a computed field will automatically appear as part of this model's display in the web UI. See notes about viewing computed fields via the REST API below.
```

## Computed Field Template Context

Computed field templates can utilize the context of the object the field is being rendered on. This context is available for use in templates via the `obj` keyword. As an example, for a computed field being rendered on a Device object, the name of the site that this Device belongs to can be accessed like this:
```jinja2
{{ obj.site.name }}
```

> 

Reviewer: Might be good to add a brief note/cross-reference here to the ability for plugins to provide custom jinja filters to use in the template?

## Computed Fields and the REST API

When retrieving an object via the REST API, computed field data is not included by default in order to prevent potentially computationally expensive rendering operations that degrade the user experience. In order to retrieve computed field data, you must use the `opt_in_fields` query parameter.

Take a look at an example URL that includes computed field data:
```
http://localhost:8080/api/dcim/sites?opt_in_fields=computed_fields
```
When explicitly requested as such, computed field data will be included in the `computed_fields` attribute. For example, below is the partial output of a site with one computed field defined:
```json
{
    "id": 123,
    "url": "http://localhost:8080/api/dcim/sites/123/",
    "name": "Raleigh 42",
    ...
    "computed_fields": {
        "site_name_uppercase": "RALEIGH"
    },
    ...
```

!!! note

>     Note that the slug field is used as the key names for items in the `computed_fields` attribute.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Note that the slug field is used as the key name for items in the `computed_fields` attribute.
```

# Computed Fields

> Computed fields are largely based on custom fields. See the overview of [Custom Fields](./custom-fields.md). As the name suggests, computed fields serve the need for a custom field where the value is generated using data that Nautobot stores in it's database.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Computed fields are very similar in design and implementation to custom fields. See the overview of [Custom Fields](./custom-fields.md). As the name suggests, computed fields serve the need for a custom field where the value is generated using data that Nautobot stores in it's database and merging with Jinja and their associated filters.
```

> As an example, for use by some automation system, you might want to be able to have an automatically generated field on the Device model that combines the name of the device and the uppercased site name. To do that, you would define a Jinja template for this field that looks like such:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As an example, for use by some automation system, you might want to be able to have an automatically generated field on the Device model that combines the name of the device and the uppercased site name. To do that, you would define a Jinja2 template for this field that looks like such:
```

> As an example, for use by some automation system, you might want to be able to have an automatically generated field on the Device model that combines the name of the device and the uppercased site name. To do that, you would define a Jinja template for this field that looks like such:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As an example, within your automation system, you may want to be able to have an automatically generated field on the Device model that combines the name of the device and the uppercased site name. To do that, you would define a Jinja template for this field that looks like such:
```

```jinja2
{{ obj.name }}_{{ obj.site.name | upper }}
```

> !!! note
>     Every time an object with this computed field is loaded, the template gets re-rendered with the currently available data. It's important to note that these rendered values are not stored in the database; only the template is.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
!!! important
    Every time an object with this computed field is loaded, the template gets re-rendered with the currently available data. These rendered values are not stored in the database; only the template is stored.
```

>     Every time an object with this computed field is loaded, the template gets re-rendered with the currently available data. It's important to note that these rendered values are not stored in the database; only the template is.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Every time an object with this computed field is loaded, the template gets re-rendered with the currently available data. It's important to note that these rendered values are not stored in the database; only the Jinja2 template is.
```

## Creating Computed Fields

> Computed fields can be created through the Nautobot UI under Extensibility > Computed Fields.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Computed fields can be created through the Nautobot UI under **Extensibility > Computed Fields**.
```

Each computed field must have a slug and a label.

> - Slug must be a simple, database-friendly string, e.g. `device_with_site`

Reviewer 3: Please add a newline here as the list is not rendering correctly without it.
```suggestion

- Slug must be a simple, database-friendly string, e.g. `device_with_site`
```

## Computed Field Template Context

Computed field templates can utilize the context of the object the field is being rendered on. This context is available for use in templates via the `obj` keyword. As an example, for a computed field being rendered on a Device object, the name of the site that this Device belongs to can be accessed like this:

```jinja2
{{ obj.site.name }}
```

## Computed Field Template Filters

Computed field templates can also utilize custom jinja filters that have been registered via plugins. These filters can be used by providing the name of the filter function. As an example:

```jinja2
{{ obj.site.name | leet_speak }}
```

See the documentation on [registering custom jinja filters](../plugins/development.md#including-jinja-filters) in plugins.

## Computed Fields and the REST API

When retrieving an object via the REST API, computed field data is not included by default in order to prevent potentially computationally expensive rendering operations that degrade the user experience. In order to retrieve computed field data, you must use the `opt_in_fields` query parameter.

> Take a look at an example URL that includes computed field data:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Take a look at an example URL that includes computed field data:

```

> ```

Reviewer 3: Please add `no-highlight` here so the URL doesn't look like a rainbow.

http://localhost:8080/api/dcim/sites?opt_in_fields=computed_fields
```
When explicitly requested as such, computed field data will be included in the `computed_fields` attribute. For example, below is the partial output of a site with one computed field defined:
```json
{
    "id": 123,
    "url": "http://localhost:8080/api/dcim/sites/123/",
    "name": "Raleigh 42",
    ...
    "computed_fields": {
        "site_name_uppercase": "RALEIGH"
    },
    ...
```

!!! note

>     Note that the slug field is used as the key name for items in the `computed_fields` attribute.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    The slug field is used as the key name for items in the `computed_fields` attribute.
```
